---
title: "Being Spoken Through: How Changez Presents His Narrative in The Reluctant Fundamentalist"
date: 2020-12-05T12:34:05-08:00
draft: false
---

In The *Reluctant Fundamentalist*, author Mohsin Hamid explores Pakistani protagonist Changez’s transforming perceptions of the United States. The novel is framed as a dramatic monologue from Changez to an unnamed American who has entered the district of Old Anarkali in Changez’s city of birth Lahore, Pakistan (Hamid, 8). I seek to answer the following: How does The Reluctant Fundamentalist invite readers to consider who can speak on the Eastern perspective to the West? I argue the voice must be spoken with thorough consideration of the Western audience. In the first half of the novel, Hamid demonstrates Changez’s suitability as a narrator to the West by building him an American identity. Only from this position can his views of the US be heard and understood.

### Changez Accommodates to be Heard

I suggest that Hamid’s strategy for establishing a trust between his Western audience and Changez is by immediately establishing the US as a figure in Changez’s monologue. Changez, in the first paragraph identifies himself outwardly as a lover of America, and for the interlocutor not to be frightened by his beard (Hamid, 3). He seeks to accommodate and make understood he is aware of how he may be perceived as presented by Professor Moberley Luger in her introductory lecture on the novel. In their article on the novel and film adaptation of The Reluctant Fundamentalist, Lisa Lau and Ana Christina Mendez draw attention to Hamid’s selection of a first-person narrative style for the novel. As sole narrator of the novel, the reader is required to understand events through Changez’s interpretation. The “diegetically addressed “you”” that Changez uses to speak to the American interlocutor situates the reader as Changez’s listener (79). Lau and Mendez call to Hamid’s interviews where he asks readers to “play an active role in the reading contract and use their imaginations” (79), further preparing the reader to consider Changez’s point of view. The novel opens as a conversation directed toward an American, one in which the American’s perspectives are immediately considered. This points toward Hamid’s intent to accommodate a Western audience by providing a suitable narrator who understands himself as potentially threatening to Americans.

### Changez Performs to be Heard

The constituent elements of Changez’s character in the first portion of the novel point to certain internalized or performed “Oriental” characteristics. In *Orientalism*, Edward Said makes a case that the characterization of “the Orient” or Arab-Islamic peoples has been a main endeavour of European culture “the Occident” (Said, 3). He explains that “Orientalism depends for its strategy on this flexible positional superiority … in a whole series of possible relationships with the Orient without ever losing the upper hand” (7). In other words, Orientalism continues to exist so long as personal and group identities are made about the dominant/subordinate paradigm that was established during the colonization of much of the East. Throughout the first half of the novel, Changez attributes his success, not to his character, but to his access to an American education. He says, “Princeton made *everything* possible for me” (Hamid, 11). The result is Changez’s legitimacy as a narrator built upon pre-existing trust for the US and its institutions, demonstrating the firmly established foundations of Orientalism as conceptualized by Said. Thus, trust in Changez’s narration (both from his fictional and actual audience) as a narrator for Pakistan and more broadly for those perceived as Arab-Islamic exists in relation to his Americanness. This extends to Changez’s speech and vocabulary as well. To note, although he comes from an upper-class family in Pakistan, it is unclear to what extent Changez’s speech is tailored to the suitability of the reader and of the American interlocutor. Lau writes “Changez’s speaking style is thus designed to resonate with several axes of power: former colonial mastery, class, and Western education and/or association.” (82), which thus reinforces his trustworthiness. Western audiences may better relate, with the additional effect of reminding the reader of Pakistan’s past colonization. However, his speech might also have a double-meaning, since it may also be interpreted as an arrogance and a subtle/insidious defiance towards the orientalist POV that trivialises and patronises Changez. Many of Changez’s statements can also be interpreted as a mockery of the interlocutor’s potential perceptions of Pakistan. Consider his descriptions of Lahore; “But it did not, could not, make me forget such things as how much I enjoy the tea in this, the city of my birth” (Hamid, 11). The phrasing evokes a certain performance of Pakistani life to someone only familiar with its stereotypes. Hamid continues build Changez as an accommodating host, one who is aware of how he presents himself to be understood by the American interlocutor and reader.

However, consider how the novel’s narrative presents itself to audiences. In reading through only Changez’s perspective, it is impossible to perceive how the novel’s events truly went on with respect to an omniscient point of view. In Changez’s words “But surely it is the gist that matters; I am, after all, telling you a history, and in history, as I suspect you—an American—will agree, it is the thrust of one’s narrative that counts, not the accuracy of one’s details” (74). And so what narrative is being presented? Changez introduces his personal history largely with respect to his time in the US. Hamid could have chosen to emphasize Changez’s childhood or life as a faculty member. Yet, American, and Pakistani culture and politics frame the novel. This is because Changez is incentivised to speak on behalf the East to the American. He makes mention that he “conducted himself in public like a young prince” during his time at Princeton “where people (he) met were taken in by (his) public persona” (11). He clearly understands how he may benefit from the preconceptions of others, in this case performing an Eastern exoticism to his colleagues and to the interlocutor. He is familiar with the rules of interacting with Princetonians and is incentivised to perform a familiar character for them. This leads the reader to believe that Changez may be narrating in a manner to appeal to a worldview that the American interlocutor might hold as well. Easterners who perform familiar identities for the West are certainly better heard by their audience, the consequence is a difficulty in separating his performance from his own identity. He demonstrates an internal conflict between his desire to be acknowledged by his American counterparts and to act in alignment with the interests of his home country. “I did not know where I stood on many issues of consequence; I lacked a stable core” he says, while explaining his inability to communicate with his American love interest Erica (91). Hamid critiques the incursive nature of American business culture through by pointing out how Changez finds himself drawn into provocations to perform and forget his identity as an outsider. He may participate in the US business world, only on the terms of ignoring his incompatibilities. Hamid’s portrayal of Changez points out a contemporary manifestation of oppression, where performance leads to assimilation.

### Changez’s Disillusionment

In a subversion of Changez’s partiality towards the US, he takes an antagonist stance against the US during the attacks of September 11th 2001. In his hotel room in Manilla, Changez reveals more of his inner disdain for America as he “smiles” upon witnessing the collapse of the twin towers (46). As Changez elaborates, the symbolism behind the attacks can be read in that the most powerful state, America, has become symbolically vanquished with the destruction of iconic and notable landmarks in America. His positive framing of the events is rather short-lived however, when the American interlocutor is visibly displeased with Changez’s perspective. “Your disgust is evident” (47) Changez says, reminding the audience that his opinions will invariably come under American scrutiny. The reader has not been given more than a couple of sentences to consider Changez’s perspective standing alone, without the US hegemonic context. After his return from Manilla, New York is described to be in a period of deep mourning. Shrines, floral motifs, and words of condolence are emphasized. Shortly after, he continues his repentance in confessional tone. “(The shrines) reminded me of my own uncharitable—indeed, inhumane—response to the tragedy, and I felt from them a constant murmur of reproach”. Arguably, Changez’s most honest, controversial statement stands alone shortly, followed by apology and justification. In this moment, Changez’s habit to accommodate his guest is clear. He speaks candidly only for moments and needs no reminder to re-contextualize his reaction to 9/11 in a manner that is most suitable to his American guest.

In his article *Surviving the dragnet: ‘special interest’ detainees in the US after 9/11*, Shubh Mathur recounts the wave of Anti-Muslim backlash that lead to the disproportional arrest of South Asian, Middle Eastern and Muslim men in New York shortly after 9/11. Initiatives lead by local police and immigration agencies were executed under the authority of new government policies and the “war on terror”. Mathur, says that these policies were “domestic repression, carried out in the name of national security, and targeted selected groups as the ‘enemy within’.” (34). This enemy was subdued through an increase US patriotism in New York and was noticed by Changez in describing the post 9/11 period in the city. “Your country’s flag invaded New York”, he says. The events after the attacks are a tipping point for Changez as he begins to accept his incompatibility with the US, despite his love for the country, since “duty and honor” had recently taken a more prominent role in American media (78). In their article covering both the novel and film adaptation, Lau and Mendes see Changez’s process of realization as a “radicalization of a Pakistani protagonist” (79). I suggest that Hamid composes the novel such that Changez’s return to Lahore is not due to radicalization, but disillusionment. Hamid writes Changez in a sustained period of internal conflict for the first half of the novel, and only once he fully considers pursuing his career in America could he decide to return home. He has performed, he has accommodated and yet he still finds himself to be incompatible with the US. The invasion of New York with US flags signals Changez’s retreat to safe territory, and a new chapter in his life. Changez can not escape his perception as the enemy in New York, despite his efforts to conform to the American ideals.

### Conclusion

In an interview with the Guardian, Hamid says that *The Reluctant Fundamentalist* “moves and shifts and reflects in response to the individual inclinations and world views of readers”. Hamid has provided to his Western audience an alternate point of view from which to consider the American relationship with the East, doing so by making clear the accommodations that Changez makes to ensure that his fictional audience and readership are put at ease. Hamid speaks directly to his audience by structuring the novel as an addressed monologue. He writes Changez to be particularly aware of how he is perceived by the interlocutor and yet finds himself to be misunderstood regardless. His will to conform to the whims of the unnamed American and his country are no more appreciated as they are understood and so he returns to Pakistan. *The Reluctant Fundamentalist * suggests that one of the fundamentals American capitalist culture at large is to forget yourself (Hamid, 62) and to instead be a conduit for another’s message. Changez learns to turn away from his exploitation and accept the incompatibilities of his beliefs and the American meritocracy.

### Works Cited
Hamid, Mohsin. “ Mohsin Hamid on Writing The Reluctant Fundamentalist.” *The Guardian*, 14 May 2011, www.theguardian.com/books/2011/may/14/mohsin-hamid-reluctant-fundamentalist-bookclub. Accessed 30 Nov. 2020.

Hamid, Mohsin. *The Reluctant Fundamentalist*. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2008.

Lau, Lisa, and Ana Cristina Mendes. “Post-9/11 Re-Orientalism: Confrontation and Conciliation in Mohsin Hamid’s and Mira Nair’s The Reluctant Fundamentalist.” The Journal of Commonwealth Literature, vol. 53, no. 1, Mar. 2018, pp. 78–91, doi:10.1177/0021989416631791.

Mathur, Shubh. “Surviving the Dragnet: ‘Special Interest’ Detainees in the US after 9/11.” *Race & Class*, vol. 47, no. 3, 2006, pp. 31–46., doi:10.1177/0306396806061085.

Said, Edward, editor. “Chapter II.” *Orientalism*, Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd, 1978, pp. 15–15.

Singh, Harleen, and Mohsin Hamid. “Deconstructing Terror: Interview with Mohsin Hamid on The Reluctant Fundamentalist (2007).” *Ariel: a Review of International English Literature*, 2012, pp. 149–156, Accessed 30 Nov. 2020.